id: intro
title: The Journey of Sequence Models
oneliner: Forty years of one question: how do you get a machine to remember what it read?
visual: timeline
---
Before Transformers existed, researchers spent decades trying to get machines to understand sequences: sentences, speech, DNA, code. The central challenge never changed — a word's meaning depends on the words around it, sometimes words that appeared far earlier in the sequence. What changed, generation after generation, was how much of that surrounding context a model could actually use, and how efficiently it could learn from it.

This course walks through that evolution in order: the recurrent networks that read one word at a time, the attention mechanism invented to patch their memory problem, the 2017 paper that deleted recurrence entirely, and the scaling race that turned that idea into the LLMs you use today. Each step pairs a short explanation with a live visual you can manipulate — drag the sliders, don't just read.
%%%
id: rnn-lstm
title: RNNs & LSTMs — Reading One Word at a Time
oneliner: Early models read one word at a time, and forgot the beginning by the end.
visual: rnn
---
A Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) reads a sentence the way you'd read it through a keyhole: one token at a time, left to right. At each step it updates a hidden state — a fixed-size vector meant to summarize "everything relevant so far" — and passes that single vector forward to the next step. There's no going back to re-read; the entire history of the sentence has to be compressed into that one evolving vector.

This creates two problems. First, it's inherently sequential — step 50 cannot start until step 49 finishes, which makes training slow and hard to parallelize on modern hardware. Second, and more damaging, is the vanishing gradient problem: as the chain gets longer, the influence of early tokens on later ones shrinks exponentially, both during the forward pass and during backpropagation. Long Short-Term Memory networks (LSTMs) and GRUs were invented specifically to fight this — they add "gates" that let the network learn what to keep, forget, or update in its memory cell — and they helped considerably. But even LSTMs struggle once sequences stretch past a few hundred tokens. The core bottleneck — one fixed-size vector representing an entire sentence — never went away. It's the exact problem attention was invented to solve.
%%%
id: attention-mechanism
title: Attention — Letting the Model Look Back
oneliner: What if the model could look back at every word, instead of trusting one summary?
visual: attention-intro
---
In 2014-2015, Bahdanau and later Luong proposed a fix for the sequence-to-sequence bottleneck: instead of relying only on the encoder's final hidden state, let the decoder look back at all of the encoder's hidden states at every single output step, and learn to weight them. For each word it's about to generate, the model computes a relevance score against every input word, turns those scores into weights (via softmax, so they sum to 1), and takes a weighted average — an "attention" over the input.

This was a big deal for translation quality, especially on long sentences, because the model was no longer forced to squeeze an entire sentence's meaning into one vector before it could start decoding — it could go fetch the relevant word directly. It also produced a side benefit researchers loved: those attention weights are interpretable. You could literally plot which input word the model was "looking at" when it produced each output word. Attention was originally bolted onto RNNs as an add-on. The next leap — the one this course is really about — was the realization that attention alone, with no recurrence at all, was enough to build a better model from scratch.
